# Work Series 3/5

## Genesis 1:26–2:3; 2:15

> **26** Then God said, “Let us make man in our image, according to our
> likeness. They will rule the fish of the sea, the birds of the sky, the
> livestock, the whole earth, and the creatures that crawl on the earth.”\
> **27** So God created man in his own image; he created him in the image of
> God; he created them male and female.\
> **28** God blessed them, and God said to them, “Be fruitful, multiply, fill
> the earth, and subdue it. Rule the fish of the sea, the birds of the sky, and
> every creature that crawls on the earth.”\
> **29** God also said, “Look, I have given you every seed-bearing plant on the
> surface of the entire earth and every tree whose fruit contains seed. This
> will be food for you,\
> **30** for all the wildlife of the earth, for every bird of the sky, and for
> every creature that crawls on the earth—everything having the breath of life
> in it—I have given every green plant for food.” And it was so.\
> **31** God saw all that he had made, and it was very good indeed. Evening came
> and then morning: the sixth day.\
> **2:1** So the heavens and the earth and everything in them were completed.\
> **2** On the seventh day God had completed his work that he had done, and he
> rested on the seventh day from all his work that he had done.\
> **3** God blessed the seventh day and declared it holy, for on it he rested
> from all his work of creation.\
> **15** The Lord God took the man and placed him in the garden of Eden to work
> it and watch over it.

## Exodus 31:1–6

> **1** The Lord also spoke to Moses:\
> **2** “Look, I have appointed by name Bezalel son of Uri, son of Hur, of the
> tribe of Judah.\
> **3** I have filled him with God’s Spirit, with wisdom, understanding, and
> ability in every craft\
> **4** to design artistic works in gold, silver, and bronze,\
> **5** to cut gemstones for mounting, and to carve wood for work in every
> craft.\
> **6** I have also selected Oholiab son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, to
> be with him. I have put wisdom in the heart of every skilled artisan in order
> to make all that I have commanded you:

## Proverbs 24:30–34

> **30** I went by the field of a slacker and by the vineyard of one lacking
> sense.\
> **31** Thistles had come up everywhere, weeds covered the ground, and the
> stone wall was ruined.\
> **32** I saw, and took it to heart; I looked, and received instruction:\
> **33** a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the arms to
> rest,\
> **34** and your poverty will come like a robber, and your need, like a bandit.

## Matthew 25:14–30

> **14** “For it is just like a man about to go on a journey. He called his own
> servants and entrusted his possessions to them.\
> **15** To one he gave five talents, to another two talents, and to another one
> talent, depending on each one’s ability. Then he went on a journey.\
> **16** Immediately the man who had received five talents went, put them to
> work, and earned five more.\
> **17** In the same way the man with two earned two more.\
> **18** But the man who had received one talent went off, dug a hole in the
> ground, and hid his master’s money.\
> **19** “After a long time the master of those servants came and settled
> accounts with them.\
> **20** The man who had received five talents approached, presented five more
> talents, and said, ‘Master, you gave me five talents. See, I’ve earned five
> more talents.’\
> **21** “His master said to him, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant! You
> were faithful over a few things; I will put you in charge of many things.
> Share your master’s joy.’\
> **22** “The man with two talents also approached. He said, ‘Master, you gave
> me two talents. See, I’ve earned two more talents.’\
> **23** “His master said to him, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant! You
> were faithful over a few things; I will put you in charge of many things.
> Share your master’s joy.’\
> **24** “The man who had received one talent also approached and said, ‘Master,
> I know you. You’re a harsh man, reaping where you haven’t sown and gathering
> where you haven’t scattered seed.\
> **25** So I was afraid and went off and hid your talent in the ground. See,
> you have what is yours.’\
> **26** “His master replied to him, ‘You evil, lazy servant! If you knew that I
> reap where I haven’t sown and gather where I haven’t scattered,\
> **27** then you should have deposited my money with the bankers, and I would
> have received my money back with interest when I returned.\
> **28** “‘So take the talent from him and give it to the one who has ten
> talents.\
> **29** For to everyone who has, more will be given, and he will have more than
> enough. But from the one who does not have, even what he has will be taken
> away from him.\
> **30** And throw this good-for-nothing servant into the outer darkness, where
> there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’
